I'll hand over to you just for some opening comments and introductions, and maybe
just go from there.
Great. Thanks very much, Chair. I'm David McLean.
I'm the chair of Kiwi Group Capital.
And this is, as you know, Steve Ujkic, the CEO of Kiwibank.
We're very pleased to be invited back to the Select Committee.
We're here, in theory, to talk about the
financial year ended 30 June 2025, but it does feel like quite a long time ago,
and there's been a lot of events happening since.
And in particular, just the
ripples and the waves from the situation in the Middle East
flowing through to affecting and impacting New Zealand businesses and New Zealand
households. And I think just reinforcing for Kiwibank in particular,
its role
to
Kiwi helping Kiwi,
and very important in times like this that
Kiwibank can fulfill its purpose and help New Zealanders get through these tough
times. So, we look forward to your questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Dr David Wilson, go for it.
Once again, Chair, I need to
make a declaration that
I was a victim of financial fraud,
through which one of the mule accounts was with Kiwibank.
So my question really is that I notice that financial information supporting
systems and controls needs improvement.
So my question is, how are the controls around
protecting
customers from fraud and the
money laundering activity that passes through the bank?
Hi, Steve.
Yep. Thank you. And thanks for your question, David.
I believe we've made really good progress.
The needs improvement does reflect
a specific convention around it's
extremely difficult to get higher than a needs improvement, the amount of
investment and amount of time required to get there.
So very focused on making improvements there.
But to get to a standard where I think you wouldn't
have that sort of rating will take quite a long time.
We have made material steps, and we're one of the
first to launch verification,
so account verification, and we're at the forefront of that.
Our
progress on resolving fraud, we've made considerable
progress from where we were probably seen across the market as one of the slower
ones to respond on complaints.
And we've been at the forefront of putting the new rules in
for the banking code of conduct, which I'm sure you'll be familiar with, as
bringing quite significant new obligations.
I think probably overdue obligations, to be fair.
But new obligations around what's required from banks.
There is some settling in period about the receiving bank, which
is obviously what you've alluded to with the mule activity.
And wearing another hat, I'm on the Banking Ombudsman Board, and I'm
very conscious that the Banking Ombudsman is wanting to push and get
clarity on that space. So hopefully we get much more satisfactory resolutions.
Yeah, I think that area is still kind of unresolved in terms of the
activity.
It is, and as
you'll be very unfortunately
familiar with, there's categories where we've got people that
are kind of
willfully blind to the situation-
Mm
... and show a pattern, and those are far more easily identified than those in the
one-off situation.
Quite often there is difficult social circumstances where people are,
this may be their last chance to try and get themselves out of a corner.
Yeah.
That's much more difficult to detect.
But I certainly take the point that we need to do everything we can to
strengthen that space.
Is that a supplementary from-
Supplementary, yeah. Thanks, gentlemen. Welcome.
Around the same topic or add on, because obviously, yeah, one of the things
in the audit report was around these controls,
and access management, et cetera.
I understand that obviously you are also doing a new technology platform.
Yep.
Some of that's to enable open banking, et cetera, but I'm
assuming also that would address some of the issues that were raised in the audit
report and can you tell us the progress on that platform?
Yeah.
Absolutely at the heart of transformation is a set of capabilities that you're
talking about around segregation of duties.
User identity access management is one of the biggest investments in technology,
to really push us to a situation where we absolutely think that we've got
a global standard of that. The challenge we've had, some of the systems
are from the start of Kiwibank, 24 years old.
As you would imagine, technology that was built 24 years ago doesn't
play that well with the sort of modern architecture that we've
done, and one of the great challenges of banking transformation is you're trying to
get 25-year-old tech to talk to brand new stuff.
Mm.
And that's not always an easy marriage between those two.
But certainly, the cybersecurity and the identity access
management are two of the largest components of the investment we're making.
And we have to run fast because we're up against
global networks of well-organized criminals who are extremely innovative
and getting new tools all the time.
For example, the new Mythos AI which
gives
next-level capability for hackers.
So we have to run really hard at this space, and we're really committed to
investing in it.
Yeah, I think the vast majority of New Zealanders would be very surprised with the
sophistication of cyber criminals.
Mm.
How diversified they are, where they're operating from, marketplaces that they're
operating on, have customer satisfaction scores, all those things
you'd expect in a very large corporate.
It's probably the second most profitable business in the world, behind drugs, I
suspect.
And the other thing I'd say is just a plea that it's important that all of New
Zealand work together on this as well.
So as well as us doing it individually, we want New Zealand to be seen globally as
a tough nut to crack.
Yeah.
And so we're very committed to working with groups convened by the government
to ensure our national cybersecurity is up to scratch.
Certainly hope that at some stage the committee might find its chance to invite the
Metas of the world to come in and talk about what extra activity they could
undertake to protect us.
Mm.
I've been, and Catherine from Westpac, has been the subject of a deep AI
fake just in recent times, pushing an investment scam.
It's very unsettling when it's you.Not more so for the people that might think it's
legitimate.
And it's far too hard to get that stuff taken down by companies like Meta.
Thank you. We've got a new primary question from Nancy Liu.
Thank you, Chair, and welcome. Good to see you.
In your opening remarks, you made mention of obviously the
very unprecedented uncertainty we have around the world right now.
So I want to understand from you, a couple of things,
including how is performance tracking so far at Tsodact,
knowing that we are talking about the financial year ended almost a year ago, but
also the provision for the expected credit loss.
Yep.
And more broadly, just from your perspective and
your communications with your customers, with your clients, how are they going?
Yeah, sure. So I'll start with the customers first.
I
think New Zealanders show that they are very resilient, and keeping a roof
over their head shows that they are very prepared to make sacrifices to
do so. So our impairments, and people being
in a bad debt category are still pretty small, to be fair.
On the rise, but when you think about our borrowers,
99.6% of them are up to date. So, the
vast majority of New Zealanders are navigating.
What it does have a very clear knock-on impact too, and I think you can see it
regardless of where your constituents are, that discretionary spending
is off very significantly.
And the economic headwinds of fuel are probably the most direct tax
that I've seen in my career. I think-
Mm-hmm
... its ability to really hamper discretionary spend and make it
really difficult for companies that don't have the ability to pass on
those charges, I think are doing it tough.
We haven't seen any significant
fallout, but I think it's fair to say that people's numbers will be down
really materially, which usually takes a little while to play
through. We are making as many calls as we can.
We always encourage people to speak to us as early as they can because that gives
us our best chance to try and help them.
But for instance, we haven't had a mortgagee sale.
And so,
most customers are navigating really difficult times.
In terms of provisions, we've got $128 million provided for
as at the last quarterly Reserve Bank, which is the last
public numbers. That's $92 million of its collective.
So,
we are going to, I'm sure... I'm sort of getting ahead of myself a little bit, but
I'd be very confident we'll follow the other big three banks who just announced by
adding on more collective provision.
Okay.
We have talked about, at our executive risk committee, the need
to go to a more pessimistic economic scenario.
So we run three scenarios and I guess a status quo, a
slightly pessimistic, and a more pessimistic.
The difference between the middle one and the bottom one is about another $9
million in overlay.
And I would expect that that would be going to the end of the year and would be
coming through. So we'll be making more provisions.
Having said that, at $128 million,
I think that we are well provided for and we've got good capital buffers for
tough times.
Good. Thank you.
Thank you. Dr. Deborah Russell.
I was going to ask a primary along the same lines because you did talk
about how you are supporting your customers.
I guess, we are sitting now in the fuel
crisis, which is
driven out of the Middle East. And a few years back,
we had the COVID crisis, and a few years before that,
we had the global financial crisis.
So similar sorts of shocks and difficulties.
Are you able to draw on that past experience in order to work out what you do now?
Yeah, you are. It's a great point you make, particularly the playbook from the
COVID period and now around early
identification of people that are suffering stress.
So where we've seen people eating into savings quicker than they've traditionally
done over the last period,
whether
it be more frequent calls to our contact center, those sorts of things, and a much
stronger,
for lack of a better description, much stronger rhythm about a reach-out program.
So going to customers proactively.
I would say that's probably one of the number one features where we've built a much
stronger capability to use all of our team to do that
outbound calling.
Whereas pre-COVID, that would've been limited to the amount of people we had in the
contact center. Now we've got up to 1,000 frontline staff that can be making those
care calls,
off a much stronger technology base with a much stronger way to record where
they're at. So I'd say that's the number one way.
I think the second way is,
in all three of those crisis, is that patience has been rewarded.
That cycles are bad, that they're hard going, but they don't last
forever. And so taking and staying open for business I think is
critical. But also recognizing that people will turn a
corner.
Mm-hmm.
Who knows when?
But that's the job of a bank is to just be a bit resilient and patient in these
situations.
No, I know it's hard to-
Yeah.
I completely agree. I know if you can sit tight, it
helps at this stage.
There's degrees of uncertainty in this.
Are you finding it
possible to model possible outcomes in this scenario that you weren't in COVID, or
the other way around, or is it just sort of they're too different to be able to
sort of-
I think it's almost too early as well.
Right. Sure.
But that's active work will be going on. It's going on at the moment.
Yeah.
Modeling that with the economics team, the credit team.
Modeling different scenarios, as Steve said.
Yeah.
Plugging them in and saying, "What is that likely to mean for people?"
And there's also a not... The FRS requirements are very
particular about how you do that, but there is also has to be room for an
overlay, which is about that uncertainty that you talked to.
Yeah.
Which is actually the unknowns.
So if you'd asked us a month ago, how long was this going to last?
I'm sure half the room might've said in the next few weeks.
Today, I'm not sure any of us would-
Yeah
... be as bold as that. So-
Mm-hmm
... making sure that the models can tell you a lot, but they can't tell you
everything.
Yeah. We're what? We're three months into this now, are we?
And-
Three months into the two-week war. Yeah.
I was trying to remember back to COVID.
We're-
Yeah
We had a little bit more advance warning that it was coming because it started to
affect overseas before it-
Mm
... got to us.
Yeah.
But then it was so uncertain for quite a long time as to how it was going to
develop and-
We have also had an eye on the, global financial crisis, although only the older
ones of us can remember that.
Yeah.
But, that in particular, the implications for that if global financial
markets were to be materially affected and shut down.
And in the early stages of this Iran crisis, there were bumps
in the availability of funding from global wholesale markets.
So that sort of playbook's been dusted off.
It doesn't look like it's an issue at the moment, but that's quite relevant
for banks where part of your funding comes from global financial markets.
Yeah. It's a great point that David made.
I should've made that point, which is, our number one priority from our board has
been liquidity.
Yeah
To make sure that we're in a situation that we don't... GFC markets did lock up.
We raised 600 million Swiss dollars in really recent
times, but there was probably a one or two days during that fortnight that you
wouldn't have want to been going to the market.
Sure. Yep.
And to David's point, it isn't not available, it's just
a lot more expensive than you would want.
Yeah.
And once you've got that on board, you've got it for six years.
So you've got to balance liquidity and
sustainable returns.
So if I'm possibly drawing a little bit too much out of what you said, so
it'll be my last comment. I get the feeling that this crisis then, from your point
of view, is maybe a little more similar to the global financial
crisis than it was to COVID, but they are nevertheless crises from which you can
learn lessons.
Yeah, I think that's right.
Yeah.
I was going to say the GFC perhaps more on the macro-
Yeah
... funding markets. And COVID perhaps, in the early stages anyway, on
the impact on individual businesses.
Right.
But COVID then sort of turned the other way around where it was stay-at-home
shopping and things sort of changed quite quickly.
So-
Yeah
... yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks. David, is yours a supplementary or...?
Yes, it is. To Deborah's point, and runs down the same lines
really.
So have you, seen as how we're now looking forward and taking account of
the
Iran crisis, have you seen substantive changes
in terms of residential versus commercial lending?
Well, both are very quiet.
I would say in the business space,
customers that just don't have the confidence to make commitment about capital
equipment and-
Mm
... and making big shifts. We've got a number of customers who were ready
to go, either committing to, say, a large lease or committing to
a new capital project that have just put that on the back burner.
Mm.
So that's sort of different to
the other committee question, which was around,
are you seeing problems? I think people are holding onto the cash they've got.
So in the same way as liquidity's king for us, liquidity is king for customers.
Residential particularly, not so much first home buyer, that's still
pretty
strong.
Yeah.
But what we have seen in our commercial property space is anyone buying off the
plans has just walked away.
Mm.
So there's no activity of people wanting to buy off the plans at the moment,
because they're just not sure what those properties are going to be worth by the
time they're constructed. Construction costs
look vulnerable to the crisis that we're in at the moment, so
just much slower. All those things have a knock-on, so if you're
collecting waste from a building site, that building site's not happening anymore.
So we're seeing the second and third order knock-ons for businesses.
Mm.
Not just the construction businesses, but those that support them, the
subcontractors, everyone. Everyone's a lot quieter.
Right.
And Bidwell.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and thanks Steve and David, and to your team for coming
today. The year in review coincided with the
banking inquiry,
which you're no doubt-
Yes
... aware of and familiar with. And,
I think actually there's very few things that we all agree on, but we all want Kiwi
Bank actually to do well and to become a sizable
competitor in the market.
I guess my question to you is,
most of the debate around that pathway to being a competitor
for Kiwi Bank revolves around capital structure, so raising
money from the market,
capital injection from your shareholder,
or other such mechanisms. My question to you is, in the
absence of the capital structure
question, what are the other pathways that exist
for Kiwi Bank to realistically move to a large player in the
market?
Yeah. Well, first of all, I'd welcome the fact that everyone agrees
that we want Kiwi Bank to succeed, and I particularly thank Dr.
Deborah and Francisco for wearing the Kiwi Bank black and green today.
But,
no, this is
very important.
Love Kiwi Bank.
The
banks need to grow and be successful.
We need Kiwi Bank to have a bigger impact in the market, it has to be a bigger
share in the market.
Mm.
When it's 7.5% or something market share, the big banks can
afford to sort of ignore it. If it was 15%, it would be very
hard to ignore and we could have much more effect in the market.
To do that, you need two things. You need capability and you need ongoing sources
of capital. Capability is going to be addressed by two things, the
people and the technology. People, already Kiwi Bank, because of its brand
positioning and the fact that it's seen as a bit of a challenger and disruptor,
Kiwi Bank now has a really attractive employment proposition and is hiring the best
people in the market, which is good.
The technology transformation project, which is replacing the core IT, will give it
a capability that is a generation ahead of the big banks.
Mm.
So as we get further through that, we'll have that capability.
But you also, if you're growing, you need ongoing sources of capital.
Mm.
And banks need to plan this out for sort of several years.
You don't want to be running short and having to come to the market.
And at the moment, thanks to the Reserve Bank's changes
announced late last year-
Mm
... the effect of those capital changes by the Reserve Bank
effectively gave Kiwi Bank about 500 million more
capital headroom, which translates to something like 20 billion of mortgage
lending, if you did it all in mortgage lending.
And so that has made a huge difference to our outlook.
So,
for the next two or three years, we-You know, or more
Mm-hmm
... depending on how fast the economy grows and how fast we grow within it.
Yeah.
We're okay from the capital point of view, but we always need to be planning and
looking ahead and saying, "In three to five years' time we're going to need more,
so we need to be working well ahead of time to-
Yeah
... to plan for that."
That's positive in terms of the sizable difference from those capital
requirement changes.
Yeah.
Are you able to give us a sense of what
made the biggest difference from that RBNZ capital review?
Was it just the ratios, the capital ratio?
Was it the risk weights? Was it-
Yeah
... you know, was it everything from-
Steve
... what was the
Yeah, a combo really. I mean, in the near term, the risk-weighted asset leveling
the playing, well, nearly leveling the playing field after more than two decades of
being
disadvantaged compared to the big players, was very welcome.
I think the second part that you touched on was the step-up.
Mm.
So as we were planning capital planning with the step-ups, that obviously meant
that we had to be really careful about what the capital planning was.
Having those moderated meant that two levers were really
strengthen the position.
Mm.
And of course, as David touched on, it was the equivalent of $500 million
being injected, but of course, we didn't have to go and raise it-
Mm
... and didn't have to pay for it. So there's a benefit from that as well, which
is-
Yes, thank you
... and I think reflects the fact that for a long time it didn't make any sense
that we were carrying 60 more percent more capital for a loan
compared to ANZ.
Mm. No, great news. Thank you.
Just a supplementary on that. So that gives you that effectively the equivalent of
a capital injection, just giving you more runway.
Mm-hmm.
But does that also give the other banks
more ability to lend as well and sort of neutralize your position on it?
Not really, because they're in the same position that they were in before because
their internal models had given them the advantage.
So, it
chops the advantage of someone like ANZ from being 50%
ahead of us to being 10% ahead.
Is it the tier two element of it?
Well, a combination really. It's just the amount of capital that you're holding for
the assets that you have-
Right
... was the key feature of that, the risk-weighted asset element of it.
That's the big change.
So, that
gives you a chance to be more competitive.
But the things that David touched on around our own capability and scale, as called
out by the Commerce Commission report in this last couple of days as well, is we
just need to keep growing. We need to be bigger and more influential.
In the time I've been here, I'm sure we have certainly had more influence and we're
talked about more in other boardrooms than we were.
But when we double the size in another five years, we'll be talked about even more
so. It's always been the mission to be bigger, to challenge harder.
And even if we don't win the customer, if you get a better deal, then we've
achieved what we were founded for, which is to make you better off.
Just in terms of your broader remit around open banking.
Mm-hmm.
I know you're a bit of a
perhaps-
Two weeks away
... hesitate to-
Two weeks away from from launching
... I hesitate to use the word laggard, but I think when you were here last time,
you said you'll actually have the ability to leapfrog.
But-
Yeah, we will. So we're launching...
The team will be pleased that I'm committing to it publicly, but the 29th of
May we'll be out with open banking.
The product that we come out with open banking will be the third generation, so
we'll be the first to that generation of open banking.
It'll also mean we'll be far faster to open banking for business banking as well.
And the technology we've chosen, which is homegrown and successfully
done in Australia, is a far more flexible solution
for fintechs joining us than it is for the Australian players.
And this was, to be fair, we were later, but it was an agreed and
programmed later date rather than we asked for a delay.
But I think we're in strong suit. I also think, if you do want an example of
where a smaller player can make a shift, our announcement that we
wouldn't charge for data feeds
got a response from four others who joined us after we announced.
So up until that announcement, they were going to charge you for your data to be
fed into open banking.
Yeah.
Our stance to never charge you for your own data did influence others, I believe.
And so-
Yeah
... that's an example where the technology will be easier.
We know as the smallest player we've got to partner better.
And so if we can bring other capabilities into the market, just like we do with
advisors, we should do that, and customers will choose.
So I'm sure they'll choose some great fintech solutions, and we'll be the
plumbing, and customers will enjoy that, just like you've got multiple apps on your
phone.
Steve, can you give us for the hundreds of viewers that'll be tuned
Can you give us a layman's version of an example that you'll be rolling out in
terms of open banking? What does it mean to your average business or user?
Yeah. So, if you think about collecting your information for a home loan, for
instance. So you think, "Geez, maybe I can get a better deal from my home loan."
But one of the things you worry about is, "I don't really have the time to get all
my information together, and then I've got to go and collect it and go and find my
broker." Open banking will be a classic example where you'll be able to
permission the bank to provide all that information directly to a broker.
At the moment, we do that for our own customers, but we'll be able to do it for
others now. So that broker will have the very latest financial information
in real time with 100% certainty that the information hasn't been
manipulated. That means a faster time to yes.
So for many, many, 70% of New Zealanders who go to a home loan advisor,
that will mean a far easier and cleaner experience.
I think the classic example is it won't be long before you see Airwallex and
Wise and others doing international payments via open banking.
And so, a lower cost to remit money overseas via open banking
solutions.
I think all of those are clear examples where fintechs can provide a
solution that should make banking more competitive.
Thanks. We've got a supplementary from Dr. David.
Yeah. And I'm not sure it's your issue to solve, but,
we've had discussions with various Pacific Island communities
around remittances and so on, and you see where I'm going with this.
Sure, yeah.
Some of those payment rails are just not really available to them.
No.
Can you make comment on that for us?
Yeah, I can. It's certainly
an extraordinarily uncomfortable space to see people working so hard
to support their whanau on the islands, and regardless of where they're going
overseas, to be charged so much.I don't think banks have done a good job.
It's
a classic example where the current banking systems are pretty opaque-
Mm
... and quite difficult, and there's fees on each end.
And so that has opened up quite a significant market for remittance
processes who I think prey on a lack
of sometimes visibility, sometimes sophistication-
Yeah
... sometimes the absolute need to get the money to a place.
And banks have tended to walk away from it because of the AML risk.
I think it's an area where
that's really ripe for fintechs and other technology players to do a much better
job at a lower cost.
Mm. So supplement.
Certainly hope that's the case.
Yeah. So, if we're talking, say, Wise-
Yeah
... providing that access into
some are-
... currently can't because you can't get a bank account.
Yep.
Yeah, I think what you'll probably see,
you'll probably see companies like-
... global players like Airwallets be able to provide that capability, and
so I think they've got... I did look at it the other day.
I think they had 140 payment entry points.
So,
going to
like M-PESA, so like a prepaid account in Africa,
a Grab account in Indonesia, those sorts of things.
So the traditional bank account, I think,
Dr. David, will be different and I think if you can get the money to where it
needs to be spent from, like a Grab account in the Philippines or in
Malaysia- ... then you're actually giving yourself a decent chance to do a much
better, lower cost deal than needing a traditional landing place
where, for instance, some banks and big global banks have pulled out of
operating in those territories.
That's very advanced thinking. Thank you, Steve.
That seems to be the end of our questions.
Mm-hmm.
Thank you, David and Steve. It's great to have you both here and to see the
progress.
Thanks very much. Thanks for coming in.
Mm.
Thanks for speaking.
And we look forward to the 29th of May.
Yeah.
Yes.
Day after budget day.
Mm.
Thanks very much.
Thank you.
Yeah